I initially was looking at public policies enacted in the United States, where I’ve been personally affected. Naturally, I looked at public welfare after Donald Trump’s “Plan 2025” began in action,
where he proposed cutting federal spending and firing several bureaucrats. These programs included the likes of the Transportation Security Administration, all the way to eliminating the Department of Education, and cutting social welfare programs for underprivileged citizens (Lee, 2024). These welfare programs included cutting Medicaid benefits and placing stricter requirements for food stamps, reducing the number of students and families served by national lunch and food programs. 

Once these funding cuts are put in place, this not only puts those reliant on government help in tough positions but also decreases the likelihood of ever getting funded again. This puts over nearly 100 million Americans into debt or reduced essential services. This leads me to my research question, _“Does a reduction in federal cuts in government-aided programs worsen the accessibility and quality of essential services?”,_ allowing me to delve into the intricacies of population welfare and the process of funding proposals, including state expenditure throughout the 50 states. Through my research, I hope to answer the need for services and aid that are reliant on federal funding, as well as understand how and where our taxpayer dollars are going instead.

Originally, I had wanted to research the relationship between government spending and welfare funding under Donald Trump’s recent presidency between 2024 and now. However, as I researched more, both years were too recent in terms of data, and I was unable to find any credible sources. In the end, I was only able to find the United States government expenses table for 2022, so I naturally had to use the same year’s census information for those under the poverty line to see the economic and social relationship. The first dataset is the official government spending from 2022 per state government, officially labeled “2022 Census of Governments, State Government Finance Tables” (United States Census Bureau, 2022). This dataset includes information regarding total revenue, total taxes, and total expenditure per department of the central government. Additionally, I found the census population from 2022, also from the United States Census Bureau. This includes the annual and cumulative estimates of resident population change for the United States, regions, states, the District of Columbia, and Puerto Rico, which I then merged both data sets together after cleaning and limiting the table into relevant variables. The unit of analysis is the total amount of dollars in expenditures in a year with string intervals throughout the country of the United States (country-year).

Since I’m looking at the well-being of those who require government assistance, I will also be looking at the satisfaction levels of those under government assistance. This allows me to cross-reference the data between the needs met of civilians and government expenditure. The independent value of this analysis will be the total expenditure spent on welfare programs, such as education and health, while the dependent value is the satisfaction levels of those under welfare programs. I was able to find an article from the American Customer Satisfaction Index regarding citizen satisfaction with federal government services, such as the Department of Education and the Department of Health and Human Services, from 1999 up until 2024. The article shows data presented through an ACSI survey, where consumers and citizens input their opinions regarding services throughout the United States.

Firstly, I started importing my first data from Excel into Stata. Since there are extra rows and columns full of citations and headers, I dropped unnecessary rows. From there on out, I cleaned and filtered data that I was only looking at, such as total taxes, individual income taxes, as well as corporation income taxes, and the total expenditures of public welfare, education, and health programs. I then renamed variables into their corresponding state names that matched up with their tax and expenditure data from the detailed list. Since the second data set included several variables, I only merged the population reported for 2022 from all 50 states of the United States.  

This left me with my dependent and independent variables. Our dependent variables are total dollars funded in welfare, including education and health at both state and country level, while our independent variables are total dollars spent on expenditures, including public welfare, education and health at both state and country level, in contrast to total spending. After, I also tested population as a means to test out multiple regression and test whether it is an intervening or antecedent variables, where we’re able to control a set of organization and individual–level variables, including state population and state funding by national government.
